docs/source/code_philosophy/general_design.rst, before:

==============
General design
==============

----------
Foundation
----------

.. Show a flow chart here

MAICoS analysis modules are build on top of stacked :ref:`core_classes`. 
For positional analysis, these are additionally split into the geometries:

* :ref:`planar_classes`,
* :ref:`cylinder_classes`,
* and :ref:`sphere_classes`.

Each sub class 
inherits attributes and provides geometry-specific methods and attributes. 
The flow chart is shown in the figure above.
The foundation for all these classes is
:class:`maicos.core.base.AnalysisBase`, inherited and extended from 
:class:`MDAnalysis.analysis.base.AnalysisBase`.
:class:`maicos.core.base.AnalysisBase` takes case of the 
general aspects of each analysis, which will discussed in details below

1. **Atom Selection**
   MAICoS builds on top of the MDAnalysis Universe and atom selection 
   system, therefore all analysis modules work only on subsets 
   of the whole simulation. This allows investigating different species components  
   individually, for example splitting solvent and solute contribution to an 
   observable. Moreover, many MAICoS analysis modules 
   are able to process several atom selections from 
   one simulation within one analysis run by providing a :class:`list` of atom selections.
   This reduces I/O loads and operations 
   and gains a speed up for the analysis. 

2. **Translational coordinate transformations and unit cell wrapping**
   MAICoS works with a reference structure denoted by `refgroup` 
   which center of mass (com) serves as the coordinate origin for 
   every analysis. MDAnalysis's cell dimension and coordinates range from 
   `0` to `L` where 
   `L` is the dimension of the simulation box. Therefore, MAICoS defines the 
   origin at the center of the simulation cell.
   
   Within each frame of the analysis the `refgroup`'s com 
   is translated to the origin and all coordinates are wrapped into the 
   primary unit cell. Additionally, it is possible to unwrap molecules afterwords
   since especially dielectric analysis require whole molecules. With this 
   centering, the investigation of systems that translate over time is made possible,
   such as for example soft interfaces or moving molecules. 
   However, users are not forced to give a `refgroup`. If no such 
   reference structure is given, MAICoS takes the frame specific center 
   of the simulation cell as the origin.

   User provided ranges for spatial analysis are always with respect to the 
   `refgroup` and not in absolute box coordinates. 
   For example a 1-dimensional planar analysis ranging from `-2 (Å)` to `0` 
   considers atoms on the left half space of the `refgroup`.

3. **Trajectory iteration**
   Each module implements an initialization, a prepare,  a single frame and a conclude 
   method. The `AnalysisBase` will perform an analysis that is based on these provided methods. 
   It is possible to provide an initial and final frame as well as a step size, and 
   the analysis of individual frames is also possible.

4. **Time averaging of observables**
   For observables that have to be time-averaged,
   :class:`maicos.core.base.AnalysisBase` provides a Frame dictionary.
   Each key has to be updated within the `single_frame` method and the mean and 
   the variance of each observables will be provided within a `mean` and a `var` 
   dictionary. Each key name within these two dictionaries is the same as within the 
   frame dictionary.

5. **On-the-fly output**
   MAICoS is able to update analysis results during the analysis. This can be in
   particular useful for long analysis providing a way to check the correctness 
   of analysis parameters during the run.

6. **Correlation time estimation**
   For the calculation of the mean and the standard deviation MAICoS assumes 
   uncorrelated data. Since users may not know the correlation time within their 
   simulation, MAICoS estimates correlation times and warns users if their 
   averages are obtained from correlated data. For dielectric analysis, MAICoS 
   uses the total dipole moment perpendicular in the direction of the analysis. 
   For other spatial-dependant analysis, the correlation time is estimated 
   from the central bin of the refgroup; in the center of the simulation cell.

--------------------------
Spatial Dependent Analysis
--------------------------

A spatial dependent analysis is crucial for interfacial and confined systems.
Based on the `AnalysisBase`, MAICoS provides intermediate :ref:`core_classes` 
for the three main geometries: 

* :class:`maicos.core.planar.PlanarBase`,
* :class:`maicos.core.cylinder.CylinderBase`,
* and :class:`maicos.core.sphere.SphereBase`.

These modules take care of the coordinate transformations, of the
spatial boundaries, and of the spatial resolution of the analysis. 

A design concept of MAICoS for spatial analysis is that the user 
always provides the spatial resolution 
via the `bin_width` parameter rather than a number of bins. Therefore, the same analysis 
code is easily transferable to different simulation size without additional 
considerations about the spatial resolution.

Based on the three geometric base classes, three corresponding 
high level classes are provided:

* :class:`maicos.core.planar.ProfilePlanarBase`,
* :class:`maicos.core.cylinder.ProfileCylinderBase`,
* and :class:`maicos.core.sphere.ProfileSphereBase`. 

When developing a new analysis class based on one of theses three
classes, only a single `weight` function has to be provided. All current 
:ref:`weighting_functions` are documented.
For instance, the atomic weight could be the masses,
thus resulting in mass density profiles as done 
in :ref:`DensityPlanar`, atomic or molecular velocities as for
:ref:`VelocityPlanar`, or the dipolar orientations as used by the
:ref:`Diporder` class. 

More details on each base class is given in the API Documentation and for
detailed information on the physical principles of each module consider 
the following sections.

Commit message:

Add MAICoS UML Class Diagramm

docs/source/code_philosophy/general_design.rst, after:

==============
General design
==============

----------
Foundation
----------

.. The UML class diagram was generated from 
.. https://lucid.app/lucidchart/07b20a01-4e5b-4b0e-9b3d-c8665c55b02e/edit?invitationId=inv_872a7691-41fd-4ecb-b0f1-6e1e2df1db5e&page=HWEp-vi-RSFO#

.. image:: ../images/maicos_core_design.svg
   :alt: UML chart of the MAICoS core classes

MAICoS analysis modules are build on top of stacked :ref:`core_classes`. 
For positional analysis, these are additionally split into the geometries:

* :ref:`planar_classes`,
* :ref:`cylinder_classes`,
* and :ref:`sphere_classes`.

Each sub class 
inherits attributes and provides geometry-specific methods and attributes. 
The flow chart is shown in the figure above.
The foundation for all these classes is
:class:`maicos.core.base.AnalysisBase`, inherited and extended from 
:class:`MDAnalysis.analysis.base.AnalysisBase`.
:class:`maicos.core.base.AnalysisBase` takes case of the 
general aspects of each analysis, which will discussed in details below

1. **Atom Selection**
   MAICoS builds on top of the MDAnalysis Universe and atom selection 
   system, therefore all analysis modules work only on subsets 
   of the whole simulation. This allows investigating different species components  
   individually, for example splitting solvent and solute contribution to an 
   observable. Moreover, many MAICoS analysis modules 
   are able to process several atom selections from 
   one simulation within one analysis run by providing a :class:`list` of atom selections.
   This reduces I/O loads and operations 
   and gains a speed up for the analysis. 

2. **Translational coordinate transformations and unit cell wrapping**
   MAICoS works with a reference structure denoted by `refgroup` 
   which center of mass (com) serves as the coordinate origin for 
   every analysis. MDAnalysis's cell dimension and coordinates range from 
   `0` to `L` where 
   `L` is the dimension of the simulation box. Therefore, MAICoS defines the 
   origin at the center of the simulation cell.
   
   Within each frame of the analysis the `refgroup`'s com 
   is translated to the origin and all coordinates are wrapped into the 
   primary unit cell. Additionally, it is possible to unwrap molecules afterwords
   since especially dielectric analysis require whole molecules. With this 
   centering, the investigation of systems that translate over time is made possible,
   such as for example soft interfaces or moving molecules. 
   However, users are not forced to give a `refgroup`. If no such 
   reference structure is given, MAICoS takes the frame specific center 
   of the simulation cell as the origin.

   User provided ranges for spatial analysis are always with respect to the 
   `refgroup` and not in absolute box coordinates. 
   For example a 1-dimensional planar analysis ranging from `-2 (Å)` to `0` 
   considers atoms on the left half space of the `refgroup`.

3. **Trajectory iteration**
   Each module implements an initialization, a prepare,  a single frame and a conclude 
   method. The `AnalysisBase` will perform an analysis that is based on these provided methods. 
   It is possible to provide an initial and final frame as well as a step size, and 
   the analysis of individual frames is also possible.

4. **Time averaging of observables**
   For observables that have to be time-averaged,
   :class:`maicos.core.base.AnalysisBase` provides a Frame dictionary.
   Each key has to be updated within the `single_frame` method and the mean and 
   the variance of each observables will be provided within a `mean` and a `var` 
   dictionary. Each key name within these two dictionaries is the same as within the 
   frame dictionary.

5. **On-the-fly output**
   MAICoS is able to update analysis results during the analysis. This can be in
   particular useful for long analysis providing a way to check the correctness 
   of analysis parameters during the run.

6. **Correlation time estimation**
   For the calculation of the mean and the standard deviation MAICoS assumes 
   uncorrelated data. Since users may not know the correlation time within their 
   simulation, MAICoS estimates correlation times and warns users if their 
   averages are obtained from correlated data. For dielectric analysis, MAICoS 
   uses the total dipole moment perpendicular in the direction of the analysis. 
   For other spatial-dependant analysis, the correlation time is estimated 
   from the central bin of the refgroup; in the center of the simulation cell.

--------------------------
Spatial Dependent Analysis
--------------------------

A spatial dependent analysis is crucial for interfacial and confined systems.
Based on the `AnalysisBase`, MAICoS provides intermediate :ref:`core_classes` 
for the three main geometries: 

* :class:`maicos.core.planar.PlanarBase`,
* :class:`maicos.core.cylinder.CylinderBase`,
* and :class:`maicos.core.sphere.SphereBase`.

These modules take care of the coordinate transformations, of the
spatial boundaries, and of the spatial resolution of the analysis. 

A design concept of MAICoS for spatial analysis is that the user 
always provides the spatial resolution 
via the `bin_width` parameter rather than a number of bins. Therefore, the same analysis 
code is easily transferable to different simulation size without additional 
considerations about the spatial resolution.

Based on the three geometric base classes, three corresponding 
high level classes are provided:

* :class:`maicos.core.planar.ProfilePlanarBase`,
* :class:`maicos.core.cylinder.ProfileCylinderBase`,
* and :class:`maicos.core.sphere.ProfileSphereBase`. 

When developing a new analysis class based on one of theses three
classes, only a single `weight` function has to be provided. All current 
:ref:`weighting_functions` are documented.
For instance, the atomic weight could be the masses,
thus resulting in mass density profiles as done 
in :ref:`DensityPlanar`, atomic or molecular velocities as for
:ref:`VelocityPlanar`, or the dipolar orientations as used by the
:ref:`Diporder` class. 

More details on each base class is given in the API Documentation and for
detailed information on the physical principles of each module consider 
the following sections.
