docs/src/devdoc/tests.rst, before:

Testing
=======

Whenever you add a new feature to the code you should also add a test case.
Further test cases are also useful if a bug is fixed or you consider something
to be worthwhile. Follow the philosophy - the more the better!

Continuous Integration pipeline is based on Tox_.
So you need to install `tox` first::

    pip install tox
    # or
    conda install tox-c conda-forge

You can run all tests by:

.. _Tox: https://tox.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

::

    tox

These are exactly the same tests that will be performed online in our
GitLab CI workflows.

Also, you can run individual environments if you wish to test only
specific functionalities, for example:

::

    tox -e lint  # code style
    tox -e py310-build-linux  # packaging
    tox -e docs  # only builds the documentation
    tox -e py310-tests  # testing

Where the commands above assume that you are using Python 3.10 and Linux.
For other Python versions i.e. 3.11 change to `py311`. For MacOs use
`macos` and for Windows `windows`.

Commit message:

Use black formatter and 88 chars/line

docs/src/devdoc/tests.rst, after:

Testing
=======

Whenever you add a new feature to the code you should also add a test case. Further test
cases are also useful if a bug is fixed or you consider something to be worthwhile.
Follow the philosophy - the more the better!

Continuous Integration pipeline is based on Tox_. So you need to install `tox` first::

    pip install tox
    # or
    conda install tox-c conda-forge

You can run all tests by:

.. _Tox: https://tox.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

::

    tox

These are exactly the same tests that will be performed online in our GitLab CI
workflows.

Also, you can run individual environments if you wish to test only specific
functionalities, for example:

::

    tox -e lint  # code style
    tox -e py310-build-linux  # packaging
    tox -e docs  # only builds the documentation
    tox -e py310-tests  # testing

Where the commands above assume that you are using Python 3.10 and Linux. For other
Python versions i.e. 3.11 change to `py311`. For MacOs use `macos` and for Windows
`windows`.

You can also use ``tox -e format`` to use tox to do actual formatting instead of just
testing it. Also, you may want to setup your editor to automatically apply the `black
<https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`_ code formatter when saving your files, there
are plugins to do this with `all major editors
<https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/editor_integration.html>`_.
