docs/src/explanations/general-design.rst, before:

==============
General design
==============

----------
Foundation
----------

.. The UML class diagram was generated from
.. https://lucid.app/lucidchart/07b20a01-4e5b-4b0e-9b3d-c8665c55b02e/edit?invitationId=inv_872a7691-41fd-4ecb-b0f1-6e1e2df1db5e&page=HWEp-vi-RSFO#

.. image:: ../../static/maicos_core_design.svg
   :alt: UML chart of the MAICoS core classes

MAICoS analysis modules are build on top of stacked :ref:`core_classes` as
shown in the UML chart above.
For spatial dependent analysis, these are split into the geometries:

* :ref:`planar_classes`,
* :ref:`cylinder_classes`,
* and :ref:`sphere_classes`.

Each sub class
inherits attributes and provides geometry-specific methods and attributes.
The flow chart is shown in the figure above.
The foundation for all these classes is
:class:`maicos.core.base.AnalysisBase`, inherited and extended from
:class:`MDAnalysis.analysis.base.AnalysisBase`.
:class:`maicos.core.base.AnalysisBase` takes case of the
general aspects of each analysis, which will discussed in details below:

1. **Atom Selection -**
   MAICoS builds on top of the MDAnalysis Universe and atom selection
   system, therefore all analysis modules work only on subsets
   of the whole simulation. This allows investigating different species components
   individually, for example splitting solvent and solute contribution to an
   observable. Moreover, many MAICoS analysis modules
   are able to process several atom selections from
   one simulation within one analysis run by providing a :class:`list` of atom selections.
   This reduces I/O loads and operations
   and gains a speed up for the analysis.

2. **Translational coordinate transformations and unit cell wrapping -**
   MAICoS works with a reference structure denoted by `refgroup`
   which center of mass (com) serves as the coordinate origin for
   every analysis. MDAnalysis's cell dimension and coordinates range from
   0 to `L` where
   `L` is the dimension of the simulation box. Therefore, MAICoS defines the
   origin at the center of the simulation cell.

   Within each frame of the analysis, the `refgroup`'s com
   is translated to the origin and all coordinates are wrapped into the
   primary unit cell. Additionally, it is possible to unwrap molecules afterwards
   since some analysis require whole molecules (e.g. dielectric). With this
   centering, the investigation of systems that translate over time is made possible,
   such as for example soft interfaces or moving molecules.
   However, users are not forced to give a `refgroup`. If no such
   reference structure is given, MAICoS takes the frame specific center
   of the simulation cell as the origin.

   User-provided ranges for spatial analysis are always with respect to the
   `refgroup` and not in absolute box coordinates.
   For example, a 1-dimensional planar analysis ranging from -2 `(Å)` to 0
   considers atoms on the left half space of the `refgroup`.

3. **Trajectory iteration -**
   Each module implements an initialization, a prepare, a single frame and a conclude
   method. The `AnalysisBase` will perform an analysis that is based on these provided methods.
   It is possible to provide an initial and final frame as well as a step size, or
   to analysis individual frames.

4. **Time averaging of observables -**
   For observables that have to be time-averaged,
   :class:`maicos.core.base.AnalysisBase` provides a Frame dictionary.
   Each key has to be updated within the `single_frame` method and the mean and
   the variance of each observables will be provided within a `mean` and a `var`
   dictionary. Each key name within these two dictionaries is the same as within the
   frame dictionary.

5. **On-the-fly output -**
   MAICoS is able to update analysis results during the analysis. This can be in
   particular useful for long analysis providing a way to check the correctness
   of analysis parameters during the run.

6. **Correlation time estimation -**
   For the calculation of the mean and the standard deviation, MAICoS assumes
   uncorrelated data. Since users may not know the correlation time within their
   simulation, MAICoS estimates correlation times and warns users if their
   averages are obtained from correlated data. For dielectric analysis, MAICoS
   uses the total dipole moment perpendicular in the direction of the analysis.
   For other spatial-dependant analysis, the correlation time is estimated
   from the central bin of the refgroup; in the center of the simulation cell.

--------------------------
Spatial Dependent Analysis
--------------------------

Spatial dependent analyses are crucial for interfacial and confined systems.
Based on the `AnalysisBase` in combination with a
:class:`maicos.core.base.ProfileBase` class, MAICoS provides intermediate :ref:`core_classes`
for the three main geometries:

* :class:`maicos.core.planar.PlanarBase`,
* :class:`maicos.core.cylinder.CylinderBase`,
* and :class:`maicos.core.sphere.SphereBase`.

These modules take care of the coordinate transformations, of the
spatial boundaries, and of the spatial resolution of the analysis.

A design concept of MAICoS for spatial analysis is that the user
always provides the spatial resolution
via the `bin_width` parameter rather than a number of bins. Therefore, the same analysis
code is easily transferable to different simulation size without additional
considerations about the spatial resolution.

Based on the three geometric base classes, three corresponding
high level classes are provided:

* :class:`maicos.core.planar.ProfilePlanarBase`,
* :class:`maicos.core.cylinder.ProfileCylinderBase`,
* and :class:`maicos.core.sphere.ProfileSphereBase`.

When developing a new analysis class based on one of theses three
classes, only a single `weight` function has to be provided. All current
:ref:`weighting_functions` are documented.
For instance, the atomic weight could be the masses,
thus resulting in mass density profiles as done
in :ref:`DensityPlanar`, atomic or molecular velocities as for
:ref:`VelocityPlanar`, or the dipolar orientations as used by the
:ref:`DiporderPlanar` class.

More details on each base class are given in the API Documentation. For
detailed information on the physical principles of each module consider
the following sections.

Commit message:

Various improvements to the Documentation

docs/src/explanations/general-design.rst, after:

==============
General design
==============

----------
Foundation
----------

.. The UML class diagram was generated from
.. https://lucid.app/lucidchart/07b20a01-4e5b-4b0e-9b3d-c8665c55b02e/edit?invitationId=inv_872a7691-41fd-4ecb-b0f1-6e1e2df1db5e&page=HWEp-vi-RSFO#

.. image:: ../../static/maicos_core_design.svg
   :alt: UML chart of the MAICoS core classes

MAICoS analysis modules are built on top of stacked :ref:`core_classes` as
shown in the UML chart above.
For spatial dependent analysis, these are split into the geometries:

* :ref:`planar_classes`,
* :ref:`cylinder_classes`,
* and :ref:`sphere_classes`.

Each sub class
inherits attributes and provides geometry-specific methods and attributes.
The flow chart is shown in the figure above.
The foundation for all these classes is
:class:`maicos.core.base.AnalysisBase`, inherited and extended from
:class:`MDAnalysis.analysis.base.AnalysisBase`.
:class:`maicos.core.base.AnalysisBase` takes case of the
general aspects of each analysis, which will be discussed in detail below:

1. **Atom Selection -**
   MAICoS builds on top of the MDAnalysis Universe and atom selection
   system, therefore all analysis modules work only on subsets
   of the whole simulation. This allows investigating different species components
   individually, for example splitting the contributions of solvent and solute to a single
   observable. Moreover, many MAICoS analysis modules
   are able to process several atom selections from
   one simulation within one analysis run by providing a :class:`list` of atom selections.
   This reduces I/O loads and operations
   and gains a speed up for the analysis.

2. **Translational coordinate transformations and unit cell wrapping -**
   MAICoS works with a reference structure denoted by `refgroup`
   which center of mass (com for short) serves as the coordinate origin for
   every analysis. MDAnalysis's cell dimension and coordinates range from
   0 to `L` where
   `L` is the dimension of the simulation box. Therefore, MAICoS defines the
   origin at the center of the simulation cell.

   Within each frame of the analysis, the `refgroup`'s com
   is translated to the origin and all coordinates are wrapped into the
   primary unit cell. Additionally, it is possible to unwrap molecules afterwards
   since some analysis require whole molecules (e.g. dielectric). With this
   centering, the investigation of systems that translate over time is made possible,
   such as for example soft interfaces or moving molecules.
   However, users are not forced to give a `refgroup`. If no such
   reference structure is given, MAICoS takes the frame specific center
   of the simulation cell as the origin.

   User-provided ranges for spatial analysis are always with respect to the
   `refgroup` and not in absolute box coordinates.
   For example, a 1-dimensional planar analysis ranging from -2 (Å) to 0
   considers atoms on the left half space of the `refgroup`.

3. **Trajectory iteration -**
   Each module implements an initialization, a prepare, a single frame and a conclude
   method. The `AnalysisBase` will perform an analysis that is based on these provided methods.
   It is possible to provide an initial and final frame as well as a step size or
   to analyse individual frames.

4. **Time averaging of observables -**
   For observables that have to be time-averaged,
   :class:`maicos.core.base.AnalysisBase` provides a frame dictionary.
   Each key has to be updated within the (private) `_single_frame` method and the mean
   and the variance of each observable will be provided within a ``mean`` and a ``var``
   dictionary. Each key name within these two dictionaries is the same as within the
   frame dictionary.

5. **On-the-fly output -**
   MAICoS is able to update analysis results during the analysis. This can be
   particularly useful for long analysis providing a way to check the correctness
   of analysis parameters during the run.

6. **Correlation time estimation -**
   For the calculation of the mean and the standard deviation, MAICoS assumes
   uncorrelated data. Since users may not know the correlation time within their
   simulation, MAICoS estimates correlation times and warns users if their
   averages are obtained from correlated data. For dielectric analysis, MAICoS
   uses the total dipole moment perpendicular to the direction of the analysis.
   For other spatial-dependant analysis, the correlation time is estimated
   from the central bin of the refgroup; in the center of the simulation cell.

--------------------------
Spatial Dependent Analysis
--------------------------

Spatial dependent analyses are crucial for interfacial and confined systems.
Based on the `AnalysisBase` in combination with a
:class:`maicos.core.base.ProfileBase` class, MAICoS provides intermediate :ref:`core_classes`
for the three main geometries:

* :class:`maicos.core.planar.PlanarBase`,
* :class:`maicos.core.cylinder.CylinderBase`,
* and :class:`maicos.core.sphere.SphereBase`.

These modules take care of the coordinate transformations, of the
spatial boundaries, and of the spatial resolution of the analysis.

A design concept of MAICoS for spatial analysis is that the user
always provides the spatial resolution
via the `bin_width` parameter rather than a number of bins. Therefore, the same analysis
code is easily transferable to different simulation sizes without additional
considerations about the spatial resolution.

Based on the three geometric base classes, three corresponding
high level classes are provided:

* :class:`maicos.core.planar.ProfilePlanarBase`,
* :class:`maicos.core.cylinder.ProfileCylinderBase`,
* and :class:`maicos.core.sphere.ProfileSphereBase`.

When developing a new analysis class based on one of theses three
classes, only a single `weight` function has to be provided. All current
:ref:`weighting_functions` are documented.
For instance, the atomic weight could be the masses,
thus resulting in mass density profiles as done
in :ref:`DensityPlanar`, atomic or molecular velocities as for
:ref:`VelocityPlanar`, or the dipolar orientations as used by the
:ref:`DiporderPlanar` class.

More details on each base class are given in the :ref:`userdoc_api`. For
detailed information on the physical principles of each module consider
the following sections.
